Soundee - speaker and headphone equalization
=======================

Soundee starts with a flat response when no calibration is provided. Use
+ Import calibration or drag a SoundID .swproj onto the window to import one.
This version supports the PEQb v3 stereo layout verified in Yamaha HS8.swproj:
four 355-point curves spanning 20 Hz to 22 kHz. Other versions fail with a
readable error. Soundee never modifies the imported profile.

The green L/R curves show the combined applied EQ: calibration correction plus
custom EQ, before headroom attenuation. The pink curve shows custom EQ alone.
The numbered pink points control individual bands; faint curves show each
enabled band's contribution. During bypass the green
curves become flat. Curves 1 and 2 of a calibration are treated as left and
right; the More menu contains Swap left / right, exports, and Diagnostics.
Compare with SoundID on your setup to confirm the channel assignment.

The controls are grouped into Custom EQ, Calibration, and Output & protection.
Calibration controls are available only for profiles with a loaded calibration.
Hover over a control to learn what it changes. Double-click a slider to restore
its default value; click its value field to type an exact value. Scrolling over
a slider does not change it. Scrolling over the graph still adjusts band Q.
The More menu groups profile actions, exports and backups, tools, and app settings.

Custom parametric EQ
--------------------
Click an empty area of the graph or + Add band to add a Bell band. Drag a numbered
point horizontally to change its frequency and vertically to change gain.
Select a point or choose a band in the dropdown, then select Bell, Low Shelf,
or High Shelf and adjust Frequency, Gain, and Q. Scroll over the graph to
change the selected band's Q. Shelf frequency is its centre, where gain is
half the shelf's nominal gain. At high Q, shelves can produce resonance.

Up to 12 bands are supported, with 20 Hz-20 kHz frequency, +/-18 dB gain, and
Q 0.2-12. Disable Enabled to bypass one band, Custom EQ to bypass all
custom bands, or Remove to delete the selected band. The band settings remain
when disabled. Custom EQ is an additional filter; calibration amount, boost
limits, and calibration range apply to the imported correction only.

Custom filters work without calibration. On import, a new calibrated preset
inherits the current custom EQ and output link. Calibration files are never
modified. FIR export and Windows-wide EQ include custom EQ; Windows
uses native Bell and centre-frequency shelf filters after the stereo correction.

Listening profiles and automatic switching
-----------------------------------------
The left sidebar lists listening profiles and their linked Windows outputs.
Click a profile to select it. Use Playback device to associate it with
your speaker or headphone device. + Flat profile creates an uncalibrated
preset. The More menu can rename or remove a profile. Each preset saves its own
calibration path, correction controls, custom bands, limiter, headroom and output
link. Duplicate profile creates an independent copy of these settings.

Follow Windows output is enabled by default. Soundee listens for Windows output
notifications, with periodic fallback checks, and
selects the most recently used profile linked to that endpoint. New outputs
receive a flat profile. Headphones never inherit the speaker room calibration.
If a saved calibration cannot be loaded, that profile uses flat correction
plus its own custom EQ, while preserving the original path for recovery.

Turning Follow Windows output off keeps the selected profile. Choosing a
profile does not change the Windows default device. Existing headphone outputs
start with flat placeholders; their calibration can be imported later.

Meters and clipping
--------------------
The right panel shows independent left/right true-peak estimates in dBTP,
with peak hold and numeric levels. At 0 dBTP or above, the corresponding red
CLIP indicator latches; click the indicators to reset. Yellow marks the top
6 dB and red the top 1 dB. Four-times, 64-tap reconstruction detects peaks
between samples. This is an estimate, without a formal standards certification.

When Soundee's native DSP is processing the current configuration, the meter
reads telemetry immediately after Soundee EQ and its limiter. EQ stream output
means a pre-mix installation: the displayed peak is the highest individual
stream, rather than the sum of applications. EQ output means post-mix.
The More menu's Meter combined Windows output selects WASAPI loopback instead. Soundee also
uses loopback when native telemetry is unavailable; the label identifies the
source. Loopback reads the selected endpoint's shared-mode mix, including
applications such as Spotify, and does not save recordings. Its position
relative to driver effects varies by device. Later effects and hardware clipping
cannot be established by either meter.

Optional limiter
----------------
Enable Limiter to add stereo-linked gain reduction after correction, custom EQ
and applied headroom. Ceiling ranges from -12 to 0 dBFS and defaults to -1 dBFS.
The meter shows current gain reduction. The limiter uses true-peak-aware
lookahead, a reconstruction margin and a hard sample ceiling. Enabled latency
is about 6.3 ms at 48 kHz; disabled processing is transparent with no added delay.
It does not guarantee a true-peak ceiling for every downstream reconstruction.

The limiter follows the installed APO stage. On pre-mix-only outputs, including
the tested Audient EVO 4, it limits each application stream separately. Several
streams mixed together can exceed the ceiling. Use Meter combined Windows output to inspect
that combined output. Limiter state and ceiling are saved per listening profile;
bypass disables the limiter while retaining the same headroom.

Correction amount changes calibration strength from 0% to 100%. Maximum boost bounds positive
gain; negative correction is bounded at -24 dB. Correct from and Correct up to set the
full-correction band, with a cosine fade across one octave outside each edge.
The default is 40 Hz to 16 kHz with at most +6 dB boost.

Headroom offset
----------------
Output & protection contains Output gain offset (the headroom offset), ranging
from -24 to +24 dB in 0.1 dB
steps. It is saved independently for each listening profile and defaults to
0 dB, including older profiles. Double-click the slider to reset it to zero.

Applied headroom = automatic headroom + Output gain offset. Positive values raise output
level by reducing attenuation; negative values add attenuation. For example,
-13 dB automatic headroom with +4 dB offset becomes -9 dB applied headroom.
The Automatic and Applied values are shown beside the slider. The offset can
raise the final gain above 0 dB; positive offsets reduce clipping protection.

Automatic headroom is shared by both channels. It measures the highest positive
gain in the combined calibration and enabled custom EQ at the selected output's
sample rate, then reserves that gain plus 1 dB. Maximum boost only bounds the
calibration curve; it is not an additional headroom reservation. Cancelling
bands and peaks at different frequencies do not add unnecessary attenuation.
An uncalibrated flat preset with no custom boosts has 0 dB automatic headroom.
The offset adjusts this automatic value without changing the EQ curve.
For example, a combined +7 dB peak gives -8 dB automatic headroom, even when
Maximum boost is set to 12 dB.

The applied value is included once in Windows EQ, manual EQ exports and stereo
FIR exports. Bypass retains the same headroom and offset for comparison.
Zero correction amount removes calibration correction while leaving custom
EQ active. Headroom is not a brickwall limiter; transients can still overshoot.
Soundee does not include an audio player or open an audio playback stream.

Editing, A/B and portable backups
---------------------------------
Undo and Redo restore the complete EQ settings for the current profile.
Ctrl+Z undoes; Ctrl+Y or Ctrl+Shift+Z redoes. Each slider or graph drag is one
edit. Histories remain independent while switching profiles during a session.

Click an empty A or B button to store the current controls, then click the
buttons to recall a snapshot. Save snapshot lets you overwrite either snapshot. Both
snapshots include correction, bands, headroom and limiter settings and are saved
with the profile. Profiles can use A/B independently.

Imported calibration files are copied into %LOCALAPPDATA%\Soundee\calibrations
and verified by SHA-256. Soundee uses that private copy and leaves the original
unchanged. Existing external calibration paths are retained on selection.
Moving the original afterward will not break a successfully retained preset.

The More menu's Export current profile writes a portable .soundee archive;
Back up all profiles includes the whole library. The archive contains original
calibration bytes, EQ controls, output links and A/B snapshots. Import profile
backup or drop a .soundee file onto Soundee to add copies with new profile IDs.
Import merges with the current library. Output links may need reassignment on
a different computer. Invalid archives leave the library unchanged.

Windows-wide equalization
--------------------------
Open System-wide EQ. Choose the Windows playback device used by your speakers
or headphones. Soundee requires Equalizer APO 1.4.2; Audio backend setup
downloads its official installer and checks a pinned SHA-256 before launching
it. Complete the installer and its Device Selector. On an installed backend,
Audio backend setup opens Device Selector for troubleshooting.

Enable / update EQ attaches APO to the selected output if needed, using the
native setup helper and Windows' administrator prompt. It preserves the
driver's original effects using APO's own installation code and registry
backups. Newly attached effects may require restarting Windows audio or
Windows. Soundee does not restart audio, reboot, or change the default output.
Ensure the applications you want to calibrate use the selected speaker output.

The configuration selects the endpoint by GUID, applies separate L/R curves
and linked headroom once in an installed APO stage. It prefers post-mix when
available and uses pre-mix for pre-mix-only installations. It updates when
you change the profile, correction controls, custom EQ, headroom offset, limiter, channel
swap, or bypass. Bypass keeps applied headroom for comparison. System EQ
continues working when Soundee closes.

Soundee manages one output at a time. Switching profiles or Windows outputs
replaces its device-specific correction. Automatic switching applies to outputs
that already have APO attached with Windows enhancements enabled. For a new
output, select it in System-wide EQ and enable it once; automatic switching
does not start installers or administrator prompts. Selecting an unavailable
or unconfigured output removes Soundee's prior correction and asks for setup.
Automatic profile following stops when Soundee closes, while the last applied
EQ continues working. Disable system EQ removes only its own include
block. Other APO filters remain; avoid stacking another room calibration on
the same output. The exact factory demo shipped by APO is disabled on first
activation and saved in the backup, so it is not stacked with your profile.

The managed correction is in <APO config folder>/Soundee/active.txt. Exact
config.txt backups are in Soundee/backups. Updates replace files atomically;
damaged/duplicate blocks and unsupported encodings fail without rewriting the
main configuration. Use the backup for a complete manual restoration.

ASIO, exclusive playback, and raw audio streams may bypass Windows effects.
Hardware compatibility and audible transfer still require verification on the
actual speaker interface. Soundee does not currently provide a DAW plugin or
virtual audio driver, and a saved configuration is not proof that the Windows
audio engine loaded the effect.

SoundeeDSP.dll is deployed under a hash-versioned filename in the managed APO
folder. It supplies processing telemetry and the optional limiter. The status
EQ processing confirmed requires a recent heartbeat matching the current
configuration. Configured / awaiting audio means the configuration exists but
processing has not yet been observed. Audio detected / EQ unconfirmed means
loopback audio is present without that matching native heartbeat. Bypass
processing is shown separately. These statuses confirm Soundee's stage, rather
than every driver effect or every playback mode.

The More menu contains Export Windows EQ for manually managed APO installations;
exported files do not follow subsequent control changes automatically. A manual
export with Limiter enabled includes a companion native DSP library; keep that
library beside the exported configuration.

Tray and Windows startup
-------------------------
Closing the window normally hides it in the system tray, so device following
continues. Click the tray icon to reopen. Its right-click menu offers Open,
Bypass, Start with Windows and Exit. The More menu can turn Close to tray off.
Exit stops the controller while the last system EQ configuration remains active.
Start with Windows is opt-in and registers this executable for the current user;
it starts hidden with --background. Re-enable it after moving the application.

Verification and SoundID comparison
-----------------------------------
Verify installed EQ backend in the More menu runs the installed APO against
in-memory test tones using an isolated configuration. It does not play audio,
change the Windows output or rewrite the active EQ. It checks both channels
against a reference of the native correction and parametric filters, and reports
the largest error. It separately reports deviation from the ideal graph: the
native 16384-tap correction can differ around narrow low-frequency features.
Result files are saved beneath the diagnostic logs folder.

This check proves the backend can render those filters in the isolated test.
The processing heartbeat proves live audio traverses Soundee's configured DSP.
Neither establishes identical SoundID phase, delay, limiting or audible transfer.

Compare with SoundID opens a recording comparison tool. Create test WAV writes
10 seconds of low-level stereo white noise; play it in another application.
Capture the complete test once with SoundID active and Soundee bypassed, then
once with Soundee active and SoundID bypassed. Use the same output, capture
point, sample rate and recording settings. Avoid additional EQ or clipping.
Import the two stereo WAVs. One global level difference is removed equally
from L/R; the graph shows Soundee minus SoundID across 30 Hz-16 kHz, preserving
channel imbalance. Export comparison CSV saves the result. The tool accepts
32-192 kHz stereo WAVs between 131072 and 8 million frames. It measures
frequency-response differences, not phase or subjective similarity.

FIR export
-----------
The More menu's Export stereo FIR writes one 32-bit floating-point stereo WAV impulse response at the
selected output sample rate (48 kHz when unavailable). It includes applied
headroom and its offset and preserves
relative channel gain; do not independently normalize the channels. Use it in
a stereo convolver. FIR export contains the linear EQ and headroom only; the
nonlinear limiter is not part of an impulse response. The filter is minimum
phase with 16384 taps; graph matching
does not establish identical SoundID phase, latency, gain/delay compensation,
or output-limiting behavior.

Saved settings and diagnostics
-------------------------------
Profile selection, correction controls, custom EQ, headroom offset, limiter,
A/B snapshots and output
links persist in Soundee's
per-user settings. Diagnostics opens %LOCALAPPDATA%\Soundee\logs. Logs use the
DeeBugee v1 JSONL schema, one application session per run, a bounded 2048-event
queue, and one 50 MB active file plus one archive. Meter sample processing does not log.

If saved profile data is damaged, Soundee preserves the original JSON in a
profile-recovery folder beside Soundee.settings before starting a fresh library.
New profiles and imported backups then save normally. If the recovery backup
cannot be written, EQ editing is disabled and imports report an error until
the settings folder is writable; the original data is kept.

If you change profiles, output links, or the Windows playback device while
endpoint setup is pending, Soundee finishes the attachment but cancels the
obsolete EQ activation. Enable EQ again for the current profile/device.

Development
------------
Build:    pwsh -NoProfile -File scripts/Build.ps1
Test:     ctest --preset release
Run:      pwsh -NoProfile -File scripts/Start.ps1
Package:  pwsh -NoProfile -File scripts/Package.ps1

Packaging automatically increments VERSION's patch component, builds and tests
the application, then creates a local portable ZIP. It does not publish.
Use -NoVersionBump only when reproducing an existing package version.
The portable package does not include your personal room-calibration profile.
Required tests use the public synthetic calibration in tests/fixtures and do
not require personal calibration data. Optional private-profile validation is
described in tests/fixtures/README.txt.
Keep Soundee.exe, SoundeeDSP.dll, SoundeeBackendProbe.exe and
SoundeeEndpointSetup.exe together.

Dependencies
-------------
JUCE is pinned to 9.0.3, commit be29c81492b6151c8ea8d14c840e1311963b3a83.
CMake uses vendor/JUCE when available, otherwise fetches that commit. JUCE
offers AGPLv3 or commercial licensing; choose the applicable terms before
distributing Soundee. CMake copies its license to build/licenses from the actual
JUCE source directory, whether vendored or fetched, for portable packaging.
SoundeeEndpointSetup uses a pinned GPLv2-or-later subset of Equalizer APO's
endpoint-installation code. Its corresponding sources, notices, and standalone
CMake build instructions are included in the portable package.
